Uh, good morning.
And so we're gonna be resuming, uh,
the social Service select committee and hearing submissions.
And, um, good morning. Kay.
We have you on behalf of the beneficiaries
and UN wage worker trust.
Uh, so look, if we start with you, um,
this morning we have 10 minutes
and, um, just, uh, a, a, um, request we put
to everyone is, um, or just noting this is a public hearing
and we ask that nothing that's
before the courts currently, um, be discussed.
But otherwise, uh, the time is yours.
We have 10 minutes, and if you wish to time questions,
please feel free to do so.
Uh, Tina, everyone.
I'm Kay, manager
of beneficiaries on Wage Workers Trust in Nelson.
Um, I received QSM for my work with beneficiaries
and I was the advocate in the ba in the case of must be,
which went on to the high court.
This has been put forward
and rushed through under urgency on the idea of fairness.
And I just want, first of all to address that
because this is not a fair process
when someone's getting backdated acc,
it's most likely a sensitive claim.
If it isn't, it'll probably be a head trauma.
These people go through years of
tests and retests
and more, um, assessments
to decide whether or not they're entitled.
At the end of that, they might get granted a CC,
and that's then backdated what these people haven't had
through these years that people would've been given had they
been granted ACC at the time.
And people who do get granted ACC when the injury occurs
is access to recovery and rehab.
And that costs money.
And that is not something that the welfare system
properly provides for.
And if these people did get that assistance
through the welfare system, it would've been
through the disability allowance,
which is now being clawed back.
So that's one really important thing and,
and the amount of stress and trauma people have gone through
that re-traumatized.
I talked to one of my clients yesterday
because I've asked her permission
to provide some information to you without any names.
And she said, when I first looked at doing my claim,
my counselor said, don't,
because you'll be, you're too
raw at the moment in the retraumatizing will
just be too much for you.
The other thing that happens when someone does get this
backdated payment, in the case of MS.
B, all of her backdated that she was became entitled
to once work and income had clawed back their amount was
taxed in one year, she hit the highest tax bracket.
So she lost a whole lot of that income to tax.
That impacts on people's eligibility for working
for families because the tax department sees
them as having a large income.
So they don't get working for families
and they get to work for families debt
if they're a liable parent,
it impacts on their child support assessment.
And they have this huge child support assessment
now in April, 2024, that was changed.
So the tax gets spread over four years.
That still has the same impact on working for families.
It still has the same impact on their child support.
But the really important thing here,
because this is being called unfair
and it's being said that people are double dipping.
There is some double dipping going on.
And by the Ministry of Social Development, the Ministry
of Social Development already clawing back more main benefit
than they've paid to people.
Now, for everyone that is
because they claw back the gross main benefit, not the net,
they take back the tax that they have paid to IRD
and they keep it, it is not double taxation,
it is simply the Ministry
of Social Development double-dipping
and taking money off that person.
They never paid to them.
In addition to that, if
that person had a partner at any time during the period
that they get back day to ACC for, they're required
to pay back that partner's portion of the benefit as well.
That is also money they never received.
Now this Bill Entrenches
that taking back the partner's portion
and one of the two documents I've sent you is an email
asking why the hearing is delayed
because you'll be aware I was the person who
made 80 BAA big issue.
That was the commencement date issue.
When that happened, the ministry at least honored people
who'd lodged a review
of decision that hadn't yet been heard.
In this case, I've got reviews of decision going back
to May last year
that have just been sitting with the ministry.
No report has been written, no hearing has happened.
I don't know how many people are in that position,
but I know it is tens if not hundreds of people
who are being denied this
because the ministry has deliberately delayed their reviews
of decision since they got the high court case
or actually since they got the authority case.
So that is a huge injustice.
There are several injustices happening here,
and they're not about the people
who receive the backdated payment.
They are acting completely okay
and lawfully they've been discriminated against
by the ministry for decades.
This is 34 years worth of
unlawfully claiming something back.
Now, I wonder if this will be treated differently.
If this was a tax issue.
CIRD had accidentally set their tax calculator wrong
and charged everyone extra a hundred dollars a
year on their tax.
Everyone in the country, would we be passing a law
to retrospectively take that back Or would it
because it's a taxpayer base and not these poor
and vulnerable people, would the,
would the payment be actually paid out to people?
So this is not fair.
It is not just, and in fact the double-dipping has been
happening by the Ministry of Social Development,
not the people who received benefit.
Sure, Ricardo.
Well, thank you, Kay. Um, got a question from Ricardo.
Thank you so much Kay. For your powerful submission.
I wanted to ask you if you wouldn't mind expanding a little
bit about the actual realities like we talked about,
about the Social security pill authority
and how people who have already lodge it are not
covered by the retrospective.
But you talked about also people who have launched a review
of decision and are waiting for A BRC.
Can you talk about how difficult it may be
for an individual, particularly if they do not have an
advocate to even navigate for that process,
and whether you think that there would be people who we know
that if they understood how to navigate that process,
they would have already filed some
of these review of decisions.
I think, um, if you would,
if you wouldn't mind outlining some of the realities
of going through those processes, I think it would be useful
for the committee to, to, to hear from,
from the ground, from the front lines. Thank you.
As, as I said, these people have struggled with a CC for
2, 3, 5, 10 years.
It's been exhausting.
It's been stressful, it's been re-traumatizing.
When they get to the end of that
and they get this letter from a CC saying,
we owe you weekly compensation,
they don't even really read the numbers.
They just go, wow, I'm at the end of it.
I have to pay back some of my benefits.
It doesn't seem quite right that I'm losing kind of half
of my compensation, but I can't fight anymore
because I have fought so much.
I'm really proud of the person who's inform I sent
through showing that Ross had been recovered instead of net
because she actually still had the energy to reach out to me
and say, Hey, there's some other stuff that's still wrong.
I fought this and I wanna fought fight it to the end.
And the, she's one of the few people who's had A BRC heard
since the Social Security appeal authority decision.
And that is actually because she's damn persistent
and now that she's got the bit between her teeth,
she is going to see some justice
and I really congratulate her on that.
Um, but others are just so exhausted
by the process 'cause they haven't,
and when I talked to this person yesterday
to get her permission to share these documents with you,
she said, I just wish
I had got this at the time when I needed it
and I could have had a life and a job.
Because that's what these people are blocked out from
by being blocked out from the rehab
and recovery, they're being blocked from
living their full lives.
Mm mm And Kate, just sorry to interrupt, just quickly,
how much documentation does one need to provide
for this BRC hearings or social security per authority?
I mean, how much do people actually need to prepare in order
to even be able to successfully go through the process?
For me as an advocate, it's not daunting for clients.
It's incredibly daunting.
They get a pile of paperwork that's about that thick.
It all says the ministry's right and you are wrong.
Um, to have
to have the sheer willpower to keep going in
that without an advocate is quite uncommon.
And incidentally, one of the other people I've got between
before Social Security Appeal Authority,
it's actually his state now
because the stress of going through
the a CC stuff led to him taking his own life.
So that's how big that stress and retraumatizing is.
You have to relive everything that happened
to get you this a CC claim more than once
with your counselor, with an assessor,
with a different assessor, with someone else, prove it
to your a CC case manager.
It seems endless for these people.
Kay. Can you just, um, just give a little more information
what you, um, mentioned
before about the difference between uh, gross
and net recovery.
So I'm hoping that you actually got the stuff I sent
through recently, but reading,
reading from someone's letter,
weekly compensation back payment calculation,
weekly compensation, we owe you
before tax $168,771 16 work
and income benefit received when you should have been
receiving a CC weekly compensation
less 80,212 40 gross
total amount we owe you
before tax 88,000 558 76.
And I also attached an exhibit with her name
and all the details removed,
which is from the BRC hearing we had where the MSD
does a really strange kind of sidestep.
They admit that they received a gross amount.
We're quite certain they don't pass it on to the IRD
and they say this made our box even.
And so it's all Okay.
Well thank you. Yeah, no thank you.
Uh, look, thank you for appearing, uh,
before the committee this morning and um,
and making your submission.
Thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Alright, we, um, will now move
to the New Zealand Law Society assuming they're, uh, online.
Okay.
Uh, good morning Gareth, appearing on behalf society.
Uh, thank you for appearing for the committee this morning.
Um, and, uh, coming on a little bit earlier, uh, look, um,
we have 10 minutes with you this morning.
Um, the time is yours if you have any
time that you wish to leave.
Four questions please. Phil, welcome to do so.
Uh, thank you. And thank you to the committee
for the opportunity to, um, submit this morning.
Um, you have a brief submission from the Law
Society, um, in writing.
So what I was proposing to do was just
to speak briefly to two main points.
We're making the submission and then try
and leave a little room for questions
at the end if there are any.
Um, so, so I think the, the first question, uh,
or the first query that the Law Society has with the bill,
um, is the broad issue of retrospectively.
So when the law society sees retrospectively,
that usually invites an inquiry to attend.
'cause it's not typically something, um,
that you see in bills, especially in this express manner.
Um, and that's not a concern that just the law society has.
That's a concern that Al a c typically has as well.
There's a lot of
material in the guidelines from on when retrospective
legislation, um, should be used and can be used.
And, and if I might summarize it,
I think the general consensus is if it's gonna confer a
benefit, that's okay, but if it's gonna impose a
detrimental, take something away from someone, um, then
that's something that there really does need to be quite a
strong set of reasons
and good reasons in order for that bill to proceed.
Um, so when we look at this bill, we see a bill
that does impose a detriment on people
because if you look at the existing state of the law, uh,
following the high court decision last year,
there are people who do not owe a debt, um,
on supplementary assistance because of that decision.
And this bill will mean for a lot of those people,
they will owe a debt because it will overrule that, um,
high court decision from October last year.
And if we look at the reasons that we can see
that have been put forward, we can see two
reasons that have been put forward.
It seems, uh, one is cost, um,
and the second is a consistency with understood policy.
If we deal with those reasonably briefly, I mean on costs,
there are some figures in,
in the legislative disclosure materials, which, um, uh,
members of the committee will have seen.
Um, what the society would really invite there is
for the committee to closely scrutinize those figures
to talk to officials about what degree of checking
and cross checking has been done on those figures.
Because a lot of weight seems
to be placed on those figures is a reason why, um,
this bill should proceed
with the retro retrospective elements that it has.
I think on the second point, um, the basis is essentially
that the decision from the high quarter at odds with policy,
um, and understood policy at the minister's end.
Um, and really that's quite a, quite a sort of curious, uh,
justification for retrospective legislation.
'cause it really invites the question
of was the policy right and the law wrong
or was the law right and the policy wrong?
Um, and what we have here is a high court decision.
What's very clearly said that
what the ministry was doing in terms
of recouping supplementary assistance was unlawful.
Um, we also have a, a, a position
where the ministry could have gone to the Court of appeal
through an established appeal pathway,
but hasn't taken up that step and,
and instead has gone down the road
retrospective legislation instead.
So that's what we'd make on 0.1 is are the justifications
for retrospective legislation here sufficiently strong, um,
to meet those LBA guidelines
and to meet the kind of class of legislation
where retrospective is okay.
The second point, um, is a narrow point on retrospective,
which is this, the bill
before you does acknowledge that, um,
if it was completely retrospective, that would be unfair
because it shaves one rough edge off the retrospective
and says that if you are a person who is either
before the Social Security Appeals Authority or
before the court, then you get the benefit of the old law.
You get to rely on B and what
and the decision in the high court.
But the society thinks that the committee can make,
could go one step further on that.
And that there is a, um, important
but minor change that can be made to the bill
to increase the class of people
who aren't affected by retrospectively.
And that's people who have already started a process
with the benefits review committee.
And I think the committee's already heard a lot from people
inside the industry about, um, uh, the, the theory
and practice of that committee already this morning
that in theory it should be a prompt process,
which will allow someone to go to the authority
and appeal afterwards.
But in practice it perhaps hasn't been
as quick as you might like.
And so what that means is that there will be
what we suspect, and we suspect committee can get
figures from the officials on this.
There will be a large number of people
who are at the benefits review committee stage
who under the current bill will be forced to, um,
live under the new law.
But if the committee was minded to make a, a change
to this bill or recommend a change to the house
of this bill, they could be included in the class of people
who are able to rely on b who are able
to rely on the old law.
The current bill says, if you are for the authority
of the court, you get that benefit.
We think it could be a very easy change
and a very just change for the committee to recommend
that people who have taken the positive step of going
to the benefits review committee should also get the benefit
of that, uh, protection.
Um, so I, I'll just leave it there
and, um, invite any questions. I,
Um, no thank you.
Uh, Gareth, I think first question was, uh, from Maureen.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair. Um, thank you Gareth.
Um, um, just wanna explore a bit further that, um, extension
to include those who are seeking the review.
Um, at, at what point do you consider
that they've triggered that process?
Because, you know, from other submissions we've also heard
that it's quite difficult to get through that process
and can take quite some time for some people.
So where would you see the, the sort of cutoff point being?
Yeah, so the, the society recognizes the, the difficulty
of kind of, uh, having I guess a bright line there.
Um, and so what we've recommended in our submission is it's
if you have actually made the application
to the benefits review committee, um,
and that is a process that officials will be able
to tell you whether or not someone has very clearly
done that or not done that. Okay.
So that would be a, yeah, sorry,
that would be a formal Formal.
Okay. Thank you. Yep.
So you, you, you, you'll be able to see that very clearly.
We, um, we're not suggesting in the submission, um, that,
uh, people who haven't gone to that stage
of making the application would be covered by the extension.
Okay. Thank you. Great, thank you.
Uh, next question, Helen.
Thank you. Um, we just heard from another submitter
that there, um, have been delays in reviewing decisions
before this, and that seems to go to your point, um,
those people, would they be in that category?
Yes, I mean, I, I I think so as I understand it and,
and I'm not a, I'm not in the industry.
Um, and so we've had to reliance information
that we obtained for a previous bill.
Um, when we, when we submitted on the, um,
social Security Amendment bill from in 2025 at, at
that stage, the information we were able to obtain,
which was actually from, um, I think a member
of the public's OIA on a, um, on a public site was
that there were delays with people who had taken the step
of filing an application for review,
but then found themselves,
found those review processes at the ministry
and just not moving at all or moving extremely slowly.
So I I I, I understand there are probably also people, um,
from hearing some of the submissions this morning
who have not even got to the stage of making an application.
And that will be for a variety of reasons, I'm sure.
Um, I guess from the society's perspective, uh,
we were looking for a way to assist the committee with a,
an easy fix.
Um, I, I have no doubt there will be people who, um,
who won't have got to the stage of making the application,
and there will be good reasons why they have not done that.
I, I suspect it's quite a hard legislative drafting, um,
exercise to capture those people.
So we were looking at a way to expand the class of people
who are protected by the savings clause in a, in a way
that is easy to implement, basically.
Um, thank you. And, and, and, but,
but acknowledging that even that may cause an unjust,
and that really means you should be looking at, do you need
to make it this retrospective at all.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Thank you.
Next question, uh, Willie,
Thanks. Um,
can you just, just gimme a response, Gareth, to the, um,
allegation of double-dipping?
What's your, what's your response to that?
Uh, well, um, what, I mean, first of all,
it's only covering double dipping on the supplementary
assistance side.
Um, because the,
the legislation in the high court says it's okay
for our main benefits to be, I'll call it clawed back.
Um, I, I don't think the society's probably the right person
to get any information or advice on that point,
because I think you'll get better information from people in
the industry who'll be able to tell you about
the personal circumstances.
We, we don't typically take a role on,
on, on, on individual cases.
We are trying to, uh, sit a little bit high above that.
Um, but I, I have heard some submissions this morning which
make reasonably compelling cases as
to those why those people, uh,
won't feel like they're double dipping.
Um, and that, and that probably goes to the point about
of retrospective and you getting some information from the
officials about do you really need
to make this retrospective?
Thank you. Next question, Ricardo,
Thank you very much.
Just, um, from what you know, in terms of experience
with a CC claims and advocacy around that,
would it be correct, um, to make the assumption that most
of the a CC claims that take a while to process tend
to be on quite sensitive issues?
Um, and if you have any experience
or commentary on the sort of demographics that do tend
to take a while to go through the a CC claims process, um,
would you be able to comment please?
Uh, look, I, I'm only here from the society really,
and I don't personally have any much experience in an area,
so I don't feel that's something
I can, I can assist you with.
So I don't mean to be unhelpful,
but I think you'd probably better
to hear from people in the, in industry in those points.
Thank you. I'll catch you.
Excellent. Oh look, uh, thank you very much, um, Gareth
for appearing on behalf of the
New Zealand Society this morning.
And, uh, thank for the written submission as well.
Thank you. Thank you all.
Great. Alright, members, uh, we did have one, uh, senator
who wasn't able to make it.
Um, so we are going to suspend now, um,
and we will back this afternoon at, uh, 2:00 PM.